what happens when you type www.google.com or any other URL (Uniform Resource Locator) in your web browser and press Enter. 

1.So the first thing that happens is that your browser looks up in its cache to see if that website was visited before and the IP address is known. 
2.If it can’t find the IP address for the URL requested then it asks your operating system to locate the website. The first place your operating system is going to check for the address of the URL you specified is in the host file. If the URL is not found inside this file, then the OS will make a DNS request to find the IP Address of the web page.
3.The first step is to ask the Resolver (or Internet Service Provider) server to look up its cache to see if it knows the IP Address, if the Resolver does not know then it asks the root server to ask the .COM TLD (Top Level Domain) server – if your URL ends in .net then the TLD server would be .NET and so on – the TLD server will again check in its cache to see if the requested IP Address is there. 
4.If not, then it will have at least one of the authoritative name servers associated with that URL, and after going to the Name Server, it will return the IP Address associated with your URL. All this was done in a matter of milliseconds WOW!
5.After the OS has the IP Address and gives it to the browser, it then makes a GET (a type of HTTP Method) to said IP Address.
6.When the request is made the browser again makes the request to the OS which then, in turn, packs the request in the TCP traffic protocol we discussed earlier, and it is sent to the IP Address. 
7.On its way, it is checked by both the OS’ and the server’s firewall to make sure that there are no security violations. And upon receiving the request the server (usually a load balancer that directs traffic to all available servers for that website) sends a response with the IP Address of the chosen server along with the SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) certificate to initiate a secure session (HTTPS). 
8.Finally, the chosen server then sends the HTML, CSS, and Javascript files (If any) back to the OS who in turn gives it to the browser to interpret it. And then you get your website as you know it.